Exult Studio Documentation
last changed: 21 January 2026 (GMT)

The latest version of this document can be found at https://exult.info/studio.html


1. Introduction
1.1. What is Exult Studio?
1.2. About this Documentation.
1.3. Terms we use in regard to Exult and Ultima VII

2. Configurations
2.1. Installation
2.2. Running Exult Studio
2.3. Step-by-step instructions to run Exult Studio
2.4. What you can do at the moment
2.5. Settings in exult.cfg.
2.6. Command line options
2.7. Map Editing keys in Exult

3. Exult Studio basics
3.1. Description
3.2. Shape files
3.3. Map files: U7CHUNKS
3.4. Map files: NPCs
3.5. Palettes files
3.6. The detail window
3.7. Groups files

4. Exult Studio's menus
4.1. An overview
4.2. File
4.3. Edit
4.4. Mode
4.5. Tools
4.6. Map
4.7. Tool bar

5. Shape editor
5.1. Shape Properties Window
5.2. Shapes context menu
5.3. Shapes presets

6. Egg editing
6.1. Explaining eggs
6.2. The different types of eggs
6.3. Add, remove and edit eggs
6.4. Properties of eggs
6.5. Placing a monster spawning egg
6.6. Schedules of Monsters and Creatures
6.7. Jukebox, Sound Effects and Voice eggs
6.8. Usecode eggs
6.9. Missile eggs
6.10. Teleport eggs
6.11. Weather eggs
6.12. Path eggs
6.13. Button eggs
6.14. Intermap eggs

7. NPC editing
7.1. Editing an existing NPC
7.2. Creating a new NPC
7.3. Basic NPC settings
7.4. NPC Properties
7.5. NPC Flags
7.6. NPC Schedules
7.7. NPC Presets

8. Basic editors
8.1. Creating Combination files
8.2. Custom Usecode

9. Basic map editing
9.1. Learning the basics of map editing
9.2. Moving objects around
9.3. How to place objects from Exult Studio
9.4. Mark, delete, copy, make multiple objects
9.5. Making floating objects like bridges
9.6. How to change the frame of an object
9.7. How to change chunks (the big red outlined square)
9.8. How to make a structures consisting of multiple objects
9.9. More things you can do with Combos
9.10. Use the paint feature to quickly create a forest

10. Mods and patches
10.1. Introduction to Mods and Patches
10.2. Mod cfg files
10.3. Patching the digital OGG tracks
10.4. Hardcoded global flags

11. Playscenes
11.1. Playscenes Introduction
11.2. Script Format
11.3. Scene Section
11.4. Text Section
11.5. Notes and Limitations
11.6. Examples
11.7. Creating Scene FLX Files

12. Miscellaneous
12.1. Multi-map support
12.2. Creating a boat, flying carpet, or horse drawn carriage
12.3. Importing and creating your own custom shapes
12.4. How to create a custom font?
12.5. Other tools that might be useful
12.6. About this 'terrain-editing' stuff and why you can't just drag objects to where you want.
12.7. ifix and ireg reference chart
12.8. Porting Exult Studio to other platforms
12.9. About this client/server stuff?
12.10. What's next?

13. Credits
13.1. Thanks

14. Changes to the Documentation
14.1. - 21 January 2026


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Introduction
1.1. What is Exult Studio?

Exult is not only capable of playing Ultima VII but it is also intended as an engine in the style of the one used by Ultima VII. Exult Studio started it's life as a simple map editor but it is slowly developing into a full fledged editor enabling users to create a new game. Tristan came up with the cool name!
The main purpose of Exult Studio is the ability to create an entirely original game world without using the original Ultima VII data files. Its semi-possible already but still requires a lot of work. Not the least of which is that an entire games worth of art needs to be created.
Editing a copyrighted game may or may not be allowed. Please exercise caution especially if you want to distribute your changes.


1.2. About this Documentation.

Exult Studio is work in progress. How things work may change and new features are added very frequently. Due to that the maintainers (Jeffrey, Dominus) of this documentation may not have been able to update it. As we do not have an official release yet this documentation refers to recent snapshots.
This guide is what we hope will be an ongoing effort to provide up to date and in-depth information on how to get the most out of Exult Studio. Accuracy is an essential part of this guide. If you find something that could be clearer or doesn't seem worded properly please tell us, we will be happy to change this guide. Tips and tricks by other users will be appreciated as well and will of course be credited.


1.3. Terms we use in regard to Exult and Ultima VII

Of course the terms explained in ReadMe.txt are also used in this Documentation but we will list them along with the terms that additionally need to be explained for the usage of Exult Studio.
* tile:
 8x8 pixels
* chunk:
 16x16 tiles
* superchunk:
 16x16 chunks
* world:
 12x12 superchunks
* NPC schedules:
 NPCs can have schedules which make them do things at certain times and locations.
* BG, SI, FoV or SS:
 we refer to "Ultima VII: The Black Gate" as BG and to "Ultima VII - Part 2: Serpent Isle" as SI. The add-ons "Forge of Virtue" and "Silver Seed" are called FoV and SS.
* eggs:
 these are trip-wires that can cause monsters to spawn, execute scripts, play music, change weather, trigger traps or teleport when you get near them.
* flex files:
 also known as flexes, these are used by the original to store the data files. Also when you choose to not use compressed save games (see save_compression_level in ReadMe.txt) our save games are also "flexed".
* gumps:
 the windows used in the game interface for containers, characters, menus, etc..
* paperdoll:
 when pressing 'i' you get the inventory display. It's the picture of your characters body (or the bodies of your party members) onto which you can drag all kinds of equipment. The way this is displayed in SI is what we call paperdoll. We integrated this for BG as well. (see FAQ.txt).
* shapes:
 shape files are the format used for storage of all graphics elements (from UI buttons to terrain features) of the games Exult supports. Shapes may contain one or more frames (a frame is a single image).
* snapshot:
 see FAQ.txt.
 Please note that our documentation usually refers to the latest snapshot.
* usecode:
 that's the scripting language that drives all of U7 (conversations, objects...).
* Exult data folder:
 that's the folder where Exult stores its data files (exult.flx, exult_bg.flx and exult_si.flx).




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Configurations
2.1. Installation

* You need Exult and you need to install it properly (see ReadMe.txt). Also make sure that you are using the latest snapshot of Exult.
Exult Studioonly works with the latest snapshot, not the latest release.
* For U*ix platforms you need to build Exult Studio from the source available from our source snapshot at https://exult.info/download.html.
* For Windows platforms (XP,Vista,7,8,10) you need to download Exult Studio from our download page and install it in the same folder where you installed Exult.
* For macOS we also provide a snapshot on our download page. Download the disk image and move the app to the Applications.



2.2. Running Exult Studio

You can run Exult Studio all by itself, but it isn't very useful that way, as it uses Exult as a server. What you really want to do is:
* Put 'exult_studio.glade' in the Exult 'data' folder (not needed if you use the snapshot for Windows or macOS).
* Be sure 'exult_studio' is in your path. (on Windows 'exult_studio.exe' needs to be in the same folder as exult.exe)
* Run Exult in windowed mode (not fullscreen).
* Enable the Exult cheat mode (see ReadMe.txt).
* Press 'alt-ctrl-m' to go into 'map-editor' mode. If all is set up correctly, exult_studio will start up, connect to Exult and will have a list of files on the left side of its window.

Starting up one or the other separately will reconnect them:
* If Exult isn't running, start it up and start (or journey onward) a game and enter map edit mode by pressing 'ctrl-alt-m'. In Exult Studio click on "File-Open Game" to select the game you want to edit and then press the "Connect" button to connect to the running Exult instance.
* If Exult Studio isn't running start it up and select the game to edit in the "File-Open Game" dialog and then press the "Connect" button to connect to the running Exult instance.



2.3. Step-by-step instructions to run Exult Studio

The above instructions may still be too technical for everybody. You have to make sure all these steps are taken care of before you're going to get very far with your world building.
1. While it is not explicitly needed it is useful to have a working copy of either BG or SI properly installed onto your computer.
2. Next, you need to have the latest Exult snapshot installed properly onto your computer and working correctly. If you are currently playing either BG or SI on your machine this is probably done right. To make sure you have the correct version, ensure that it says X.XX GIT (X.XX stands for some version number) during Exult's start-up screen (for example see https://exult.info/images/screenshots/mainmenu.png).
3. You need to make sure the newest version of Exult Studio is installed properly onto your computer as well. Exult Studio should be installed in the same folder as the Exult snapshot.
4. The patch folder needs to be in folder which you are allowed to write, so Exult Studio can save any changes to existing games. See 2.4. What you can do at the moment on how to change exult.cfg accordingly.
5. In order for Exult Studio to work properly, you need to have Exult running in windowed mode. If you can see your desktop while playing, then you're doing it right.
6. Make sure you have Cheats enabled. This can be enabled in the Gameplay options of the Game see (see ReadMe.txt).
7. While running Exult in windowed mode, hit 'ctrl-alt-m' to enter map-editing mode. Exult Studio should open up if you did everything correctly. In map-editing mode the world is frozen, but you are still able to move your characters around in order to place objects. You're now ready to start your world editing. You should be seeing something like this:




2.4. What you can do at the moment

* browse shapes in the main window.
* drag a shape from the shape browser to Exult, and that object will be placed in the game.
* edit an 'egg' by double-clicking on it. An edit box should appear.
* create a new 'egg' using the pull-down menu in Exult Studio. In the Egg edit box, after you hit 'Apply', you'll be prompted to click in Exult where you want the egg to appear.
* if editing a 'monster' egg, you can set the monster by dragging the shape from the browser to the area that displays the monster.
* edit an NPC by double-clicking on it, and also create a new NPC using the pull-down menu. Attributes, flags, and schedules can all be viewed and modified.
* edit other objects' position and quality by double-clicking on them.
* browse the 'u7chunks' file, and drag them into Exult to change the terrain. In this browser, you can also create new terrains and modify their order.
* select a chunk, choose 'Paint with chunks' from the 'Mode' menu, and then paint terrain with that whole chunk.
* edit a 'terrain' (stored in 'u7chunks') by clicking the "Edit terrain" checkbox in Exult Studio. This is a special mode where dragging with the left mouse button 'paints' the currently-selected shape (generally one of the flat tiles near the top of the shapes browser). Note that a 'terrain' is generally used in multiple places in the map and changing it in one place changes it in all the others as well.
* save the map using Exult Studio's "File-Save map" pulldown menu. In order to avoid writing over files inadvertently, the files that would normally go into the 'static' folder, will, instead, go into a 'patch' folder that you specify in your 'exult.cfg' file. Here's an example for editing BG:

<game>
  <blackgate>
    <title>
    blackgate
    </title>
    <path>
    ./blackgate
    </path>
    <patch>
    ./blackgate/patch
    </patch>
  </blackgate>
IMPORTANT:Exult Studio requires the "patch" folder to be writeable. If you don't have write access you need to place it somewhere you are allowed to write to and change the path accordingly in exult.cfg.
Exult will also read files from 'patch' if it exists on starting a new game. The patch folder is expected to be within the main game folder, parallel to the static folder.
In any mode, you can add the currently selected shape by shift-clicking.


2.5. Settings in exult.cfg.

You can change the settings of Exult Studio either with the preferences dialog or via exult.cfg. Those settings are:
<config>
  <estudio>
    <main>
      <width>
      640
				** width of the program window
      </width>
      <height>
      400
				** height of the program window
      </height>
    </main>
    <default_game>
    gamename
				** default game to edit (games must be specified in
				<game> part of exult.cfg)
    </default_game>
    <image_editor>
    path_to_gimp binary
				** command that calls the image editor.
    </image_editor>
    <edit_filetype>
    .PNG
				** Select either .PNG or .SHP for the image editor.
    </edit_filetype>
    <background_color>
    0
				** background color for the shape-chooser. Use the preference
				dialog of Exult Studio for this.
    </background_color>
    <shape_scale>
    2
				** The scale at which we display the shapes. Use the Zoom up/down
				buttons in the Exult Studio button bar.
    </shape_scale>
    <shape_bilinear>
    0
				** Whether to apply the bilinear filter on the displayed shapes. Use the
				Bilinear toggle in the Exult Studio button bar.
    </shape_bilinear>
    <prompt>
      <terrain_warning>
      yes
				** Always show the terrain editing warning prompt.
      </terrain_warning>
      <npcs_listview>
      yes
				** Always show the notice When trying to view the NPCs list when disconnected.
      </npcs_listview>
      <barge_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the barge editor discard changes prompt.
      </barge_discard>
      <combo_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the combo editor discard changes prompt.
      </combo_discard>
      <egg_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the egg editor discard changes prompt.
      </egg_discard>
      <container_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the container editor discard changes prompt.
      </container_discard>
      <npc_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the NPC editor discard changes prompt.
      </npc_discard>
      <object_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the object editor discard changes prompt.
      </object_discard>
      <shape_discard>
      yes
				** Always show the shape editor discard changes prompt.
      </shape_discard>
    </prompt>
  </estudio>


2.6. Command line options

Exult Studio offers some "hidden" command line options:
* (--help) -h
 Shows these command line options.
* (--silent) -s
 Do not display the state of the games.
* (--config) -c configfile
 Specify alternate config file (relative or absolute paths work).
* (--game) -g GAMENAME
 specifies GAMENAME and Exult Studio will read the game base folder from exult.cfg. GAMENAME can be chosen from the games specified in <game> part of exult.cfg.
* (--mod) -m modname
 Must be used together with '-g gamename'; runs the specified game using the mod with title equal to 'modname'. 'modname' is the name of the mod cfg file (e.g. keyring.cfg means 'modname' 'keyring'.
* (--xmldir) -x FOLDER
 tells exult_studio to look in FOLDER for its user-interface specification (exult_studio.glade).
 You can enter the full path (e.g. "exult_studio -xc:\exult\data") to the glade file or you can use the relative path (e.g. exult_studio -x./data).
 This option is only useful to developers who want to edit exult_studio.glade themselves.
* (--cssdir) -y FOLDER
 tells exult_studio to look in FOLDER for css file that customizes the look of Exult Studio (exult_studio.css).
* (--portable) -p
 Portable option for Windows only. Exult Studio will read cfg file from the folder Exult got installed to.
* (--zoom) -z
 Scales the shapes view by a factor of 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 24 or 32. Use '-z 2' or '-z 2 b' to also enable the bilinear filtering.



2.7. Map Editing keys in Exult

Exult uses some keys for map editing with Exult Studio. Hit 'shift-h' to see the map edit keys help screen.

Map edit commands
Ctrl-Del : Delete selection
Ctrl-Arrow keys : move selection (x, y coordinates)
Ctrl-Page keys : move selection (z coordinates)
Ctrl-c : Copy selected object
Ctrl-x : Cut selected object
Ctrl-v : Paste selected object
Shift-F3 : write Minimap
Shift-h : List map edit keys
Alt-l : Decrement skiplift
Ctrl-Alt-m : Toggle Map editor
Ctrl-KP+/- : Cycles through frames of selected shape(s)
Ctrl-KP* : Rotates the frame of selected shape(s)
With some additional keys with mouse click functions:

Mouse shortcuts
Ctrl-Leftclick : selects another object while maintaining the current selection
Ctrl-Leftdoubleclick : on an object opens the basic editor
Shift-Leftclick : adds the currently selected shape from  into
Drag Leftclick : When in 'Pick for edit/combo' mode and dragging the mouse while
						holding the left mouse button, selects all shapes you drag over



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Exult Studio basics
3.1. Description

Once Exult Studio runs correctly , a tree of game files is displayed to the left of the main window, while the currently selected file is viewed in detail to the right.

 The types of files Exult Studio supports are described next.


3.2. Shape files

Shapes are the basic graphical elements of the game. Each shape has one or more frames that typically represent different states or angles of the same thing. E.g. a button shape could have frames for pressed, and released; a character could have frames depicting her sitting, standing up facing one way, or another, swinging a punch, etc.
 When a shape file is selected, the right part of the main window will show frame zero of the shapes contained therein. Shapes can be selected by clicking, which will show there number, number of frames, and name if known. Other frames can be viewed by changing the frame number.
When the selected file contains shapes that have names in their info you can also use the find option to find shapes that have that name (e.g. in shapes.vga you can search for 'door' to find all shapes that have door frames). You can search down or up in the selected file.
When viewing shapes you can press the button 'Frames' in the lower right corner of Exult Studio to show all the frames of a shape next to each others.
Shape files also have a special right-click-menu. See 1.1. .
Typical shape files are:
* Fonts.vga
 displays all text graphics used throughout the game.
* Faces.vga
 contains all of the graphics for conversation pictures.
* Sprites.vga
 displays all the animations that can be used to overlay the screen.
* Shapes.vga
 displays the objects that can be placed onto the world.
* Gumps.vga
 shows all gump graphics used throughout the game.
* Paperdoll.vga
 contains the graphics for the paperdoll interface (SI only for now).
* Pointers.shp
 contains the graphics for the mouse cursor.
* Combos.flx
 where custom made combos will be stored.



3.3. Map files: U7CHUNKS

These files contain so called chunks that serve as templates in the final map. The chunks of the selected map file are shown in the right part of the main window.
 When a chunk is selected you have two options below:
* Locate
 shows places in the Exult game where that chunk is used.
* Move
 Moves a chunk in the chunk file. This does not effect the display on the map.

Right clicking on a chunk gives you another two options (also the File-save/revert option):
* New...
Empty
 Creates a new chunk. Drag the new chunk onto the game and edit it by dragging shapes on it.
Duplicate
 Duplicates a chunk to the bottom of the chunk list. Drag the duplicate chunk onto the map to edit it.
* Delete
 Deletes that chunk. Be very careful with this option.



3.4. Map files: NPCs

Here all the NPCs of the game are listed - to view this list Exult Studio needs to be connected to Exult. When an NPC is selected it's number and name are listed under the NPCs display and you can also scroll through its frames or view all frames in a row when you toggle the "Frames" button.
 When an NPC is selected you have two options below:
* Find
 Type the name of an NPC and this will search for it in the list and highlight the NPC.
* Locate
 shows places in the Exult game where that NPC is currently placed.



3.5. Palettes files

The palettes used by a game are stored in the files listed there.
 When you select a palette with number zero is shown in the right part of the main window. Other palettes are shown by selecting another palettes number When a palettes file is selected you have some options:
* Edit
 New/Remove adds or deletes a palettes.
* Move
 Moves palettes in the file.
* File
Import
 Overwrites the current palettes with palette text file.
Export
 Exports the current palette to a text file.

The palette text files are compatible with the Gimp.
Right clicking on a palette only gives you the default File-save/revert option.


3.6. The detail window

Below the detail windows you have the following options:
* Frame:
 select the frame displayed.
* Frames
 shows all the frames of a shape next to each others.
* Find
 Lets you search for a specified shape in the group.
* Locate
 Locates the selected shape inside the game. It locates only the shape not a specific frame.



3.7. Groups files

Editing a game can become quite cumbersome when you have to choose between a lot of shape files containing several frames. To make this task easier we have implemented so called groups to groups several shapes together. For example you can group all shapes containing door frames together in a group called 'doors'.
 For this you have to select Groups and create a new group by writing the name in the lower part of the window and then click 'New'. You now have the option in the Shape Menu to add a shape to this group.
 When you double-click a group the group window opens that shows the shapes in the group and by selecting a shape you see the shape info. You also have some options to edit the group:
* Move
 Moves the shapes within the group.
* Remove
 Removes the shape from the group.
* Name
 Changes the name of the group.
* Frame:
 select the frame displayed.
* Frames
 shows all the frames of a shape next to each others.
* Find
 Lets you search for a specified shape in the group.
* Locate
 Locates the selected shape inside the game. It locates only the shape not a specific frame.

We also allow some basic operations on a group that you selected in the gropus list:
* Export/Import
 Exports/Imports the group to/from a grp file. This way you can share groups with other users.
* Clone
 Creates a copy of the selected group.
* Delete
 Deletes the selected group.

For shapes.vga files we offer some builtin groups that you can open or clone in the groups list.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Exult Studio's menus
4.1. An overview

Before you get started with constructing your own little world its important to know a little bit about the structure of Exult Studio and the arrangement of menus. An overview of some of the Exult Studio menus follows.

Note: Some menu items are only available when Exult Studio is connected to Exult, when not connected these are greyed out and can't be selected.


4.2. File

* New Game...
 This lets you begin the work on a new game. Jeff wrote an extensive description of how to use this and how it works.
 See New Game manual.
* New Mod...
 Easily start a new mod for an existing game. The dialog that opens lets you select the game you want to mod, the name of the mod and its name in the Exult menu (menu string).
* Open Game...
 Choose the game or mod you want to work on.
* Save all'Ctrl-S'
 Saves map, shape info, groups and presets you edited. Saves all the changes you've made to the world you have been working on. If you're happy with your changes do this before you quit or all work will be lost.
* New...
Shapes file...
 Lets you choose the folder where you want to create a new vga file and requires you to enter a name for it (e.g. mygame.vga).
Single shape file...
 Lets you choose the folder where you want to create a new shape file and requires you to enter a name for it (e.g. mygame.shp).
* Save...
Map
 Saves the map of the edited game.
Shape info
 When you right click a shape in a vga file you can change the info of the shape. This saves this changed info.
Groups
 You can "bundle" shapes of vga files into groups to make world building easier. These groups get saved with this option.
Combos
 This saves the combination files.
* Presets
 Saves the presets you can create in the shapes and NPC editor.
* Reload...
Map'Ctrl-R'
 Reloads the map. All changes made since the last save get discarded.
Usecode
 Very useful when you edit the usecode of a game or add new usecode to an existing game. Normally this would require a restart of Exult.
Style CSS
 The interface of Exult Studio now supports customization via a CSS file (exult_studio.css) and if you changed that you can reload it without having to restart Exult Studio.
* Connect
 Connects Exult and Exult Studio if one of them had to be restarted.
* Preferences
Image Editor Command:
 This executes the chosen image editor when you want to edit a shape when you right click it.
Image-Edit Filetype:
 Choose which filetype gets executed with the above chosen image editor.
Default Game Name:
 Choose the game Exult Studio opens by default. Use the name specified in exult.cfg.
Shape List Background:
 Sometimes the default black background may make certain shapes hard to see. Choose a different background color here.
* Prompts
 Resets all warning or dialog prompts that you are able to always suppress.
* Exit'Ctrl-Q'
 Exits Exult Studio.

Note that the default location for saving and creation of new files is the PATCH folder of a game. If there is no PATCH folder specified Exult Studio will create one. See 2.4. What you can do at the moment .


4.3. Edit

* Cut 'Ctrl-X'
 Removes the selected object(s) and puts it into memory.
* Copy 'Ctrl-C'
 Copies the selected object(s) into memory.
* Paste 'Ctrl-V'
 Shows the crosshair cursor and copies the object(s) from the memory into the game where you left click the crosshair.
* Properties...
 Shows the properties of the selected object. If more than one object is selected it shows the properties of the last selected object.
 Only NPCs and eggs show different properties than if you select Basic properties.
* Basic properties...
 Shows the properties of the selected object. If more than one object is selected it shows the properties of the last selected object.
* Create egg...
 Create or edit eggs with this. See 6. Egg editing for detailed information.
* Create NPC...
 Create or edit NPCs with this. See 7. NPC editing for more information.
* Create Barge...
 Create a barge such as a magic carpet or a horse drawn carriage. See 12.2. for more information.
* Set Game Information
 Edit the game information shown in the Exult menu.

When in map-edit mode, you can select shapes in Exult by left-clicking, or multiple shapes by ctrl-left-clicking.


4.4. Mode

It describes how the mouse behaves inside Exult when map-editing.
* Move
 This is the normal mode where you can drag things with the mouse, or single-click to identify objects. In this mode you also select objects. A selected object is shown with a red outline. To select more than one object hold down 'ctrl' while selecting. Move the selection 'ctrl-arrow' (x,y coordinates) and 'ctrl-page' keys (z coordinates).
* Paint
 a single-left-click inserts the last-selected shape from 'shapes.vga', and dragging with the left-button inserts that shape in every tile (so you'd probably only want to do this with 8x8 flat shapes). Also, in 'Paint' mode, the footprint at ground level is shown (though this may be changed in the future).
 If you hold the alt key down, random frames from the currently-selected shape will be painted (handy for grassy areas).
* Paint with chunks
 works the same as the normal Paint mode only with chunks. Left-clicking the mouse paints the current chunk onto the map.
 Take a look at 9.7. How to change chunks (the big red outlined square) .
* Pick for Edit
 Allows mass selecting objs without the need to hold down 'ctrl', just moving the mouse while pressing the left mouse button selects all objects under the mouse.
* Pick for Combo
 Picks objects for a new combo file. Double-left-click to add objects to the combo, single-left-click to identify object. Just moving the mouse while pressing the left mouse button selects all objects under the mouse. See 8.1. Creating Combination files
* Select chunks
 You can select chunks and move them around with 'ctrl-arrow' keys. This will leave generic chunks where the original chunks were, and is probably better used for moving parts of a map because you misjudged the position it needed to be in.

Note that you can only drag objects in the game window when you are in "Move" mode.


4.5. Tools

* Locator...'Ctrl-L'
 shows where the current game window is within the entire map, and lets you move the view by double-clicking a location or by dragging the little box
* Write Minimap
 Writes the minimaps (minimaps.vga) of the current game.
* New Combo...
 Creates a new Combo file. See 8.1. Creating Combination files .
* Unused shapes...
 searches the entire world being created to see if any of the shapes in shapes.vga are not in use. Have patience when doing this and treat the results with caution.
* Compile Usecode...
 Compiles the usecode script usecode.uc in the patch folder (see 8.2.)
* Fix old shape info...
 Old versions of Exult Studio discarded some shape info data on saving. This option adds the discarded information back to old mods and patches.
* Audio Tester...
 Plays back music, voice and sound effects through Exult.



4.6. Map

* New
 Used to create a new map to use for multi-map support (see 12.1. Multi-map support ).
* Main/Map #xx
 The default map or the map that is currently being worked on. The game needs to be started in Exult to see the other maps.



4.7. Tool bar

* Connect/Disconnect
 Connects or disconnects Exult Studio from Exult.
* Play/Edit
 This is the same as pressing 'alt-ctrl-m' in Exult. It exits the Map Edit Mode and lets you play the game but by pressing Edit you enter Map Edit Mode again.
* Grid
 Shows a grid of white lines in the game window for better visual control on placing objects.
* 3D Bounding boxes
 Toggles the display of 3D bounding boxes around objects in the game window.
* Hide lift:
 Hides objects that are above the chosen height.
* Edit terrain
 See 2.4. What you can do at the moment . Note that a terrain is used in multiple instances of the map and changing it in one place changes it in all the others as well.
* Zoom
 Zooms in or out the shapes in the shape browser.
* Bilinear
 Toggles bilinear filtering of shapes in the shape browser.




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Shape editor
5.1. Shape Properties Window

Double-clicking a shape opens the Shape Info window, which provides detailed editing capabilities for all aspects of a shape's behavior and appearance. The window uses tabs to organize the many properties into logical categories.
The Shape Info is a very extensive editor but most of it is self explanatory. Selecting a class or certain flags may open additional tabs with more options.



5.2. Shapes context menu

When you right click on a shape in the Shape browser (e.g. Files-Shapes.vga) you get some options of how to edit the shapes.
* File
Save
 Saves this shape.
Revert
 Reverts changes to this file.
* Info...
 Same as double-clicking a shape, displays the information in the editor. You can change a lot of stuff there and caution is advised. The information is saved by 4.2. File .
* Edit...:
 Brings up your image-editor on the chosen frame. When you save in the image-editor, ES will read the changes back within 5 seconds.
* Edit tiled:
 This is only for 'flat' (8x8) shapes. It forms an image from all the frames and brings it up in the image-editor. This is really handy for making lots of terrain frames like grass. A dialog lets you choose the dimensions.
* New frame:
 Creates a new frame after the currently-selected one. The 'insert' key also does this (and the 'del' key deletes a frame, though it's buggy if there's just one frame left).
* Export/Import frame:
 Let's you import a single frame from a .png file or export to a .png.
* Export/Import all frames:
 Let's you import all frames from .png files or export to a .png. To import the .png files need to be named with the same basename followed by the frame number (e.g. shape00.png, shape01.png). On export Exult Studio will ask you for a basename and folder to export to.
* Export/Import shape:
 Let's you import a single frame from a .png file or export to a .png.
* New shape:
 Gives you a dialog for choosing the shape #, as well as the initial # of frames.
 You can also create a new font shape from TrueType or Type1 font files. It's mainly a convenience for someone creating a whole new game, as their only single-colored. Maybe in the future we'll have some functions to create two-colored fonts like the main one in Ultima VII, although it might take hand-editing to make the letters look that nice.



5.3. Shapes presets

You can save presets that you can apply to any Shape.
 To save a preset, open a shape you want to use, enter a preset name and press the "New" button. To apply a preset to a Shape, select the preset from the dropdown list and press "Apply".
 You can also apply the properties of a shape not saved as preset by entering the shape number and pressing the button "Apply from Shape #".
 Additionally you can export/import, clone, rename and delete presets.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Egg editing
6.1. Explaining eggs

An egg in its simplest form is an object that is placed in the world, but is invisible to a normal user. When the player meets the requirements of an egg, it causes the egg to become activated. Eggs can activate anything from monster spawns, to changes in the current music, to the activation of custom usecode. You may want to place the eggs in map-editing mode because eggs don't activate in this mode. Then switch off map-editing mode to test how your egg will work during game play.


6.2. The different types of eggs

Currently Exult Studio supports the following types of eggs (more details follow):
* Monster(spawning)
 allows for the creation of a creature when certain conditions are met, usually when your character gets within a certain distance of the egg. It also allows for the creation of simple objects like walls or furniture to appear when the Avatar gets near. This could make for some interesting effects.
* Jukebox
 sets the background music when the character enters a certain area.
* Sound Effect and Voice
 will play a selected sound when the character meets the required values set in the egg creation menu.
* Voice and Voice
 will play a speech track when the character meets the required values set in the egg creation menu.
* Usecode
 allows for the activation of custom usecode when an egg's requirements are met. The creation of custom usecode is discussed (though not in depth) at 8.2..
* Missile
 create interesting objects like flamethrower traps.
* Teleport
 transport the avatar anywhere on the map when certain conditions are met.
* Weather
 temporarily set the in-game weather.
* Path
 set the destination of a teleport egg to a specific object.
* Button
 is used to activate eggs in the vicinity that are set to external
* Intermap
 Now that Exult has multi-map support, this egg can be used to create a teleporter between maps.



6.3. Add, remove and edit eggs

The most convenient way to create an egg is to select Create new egg from the edit menu. This will pop up the Exult Egg window. Here you can select the type of egg you wish to create and the properties you are going to give it. When you are happy with the egg press apply and then enter Exult and place the egg wherever you like by right clicking in the game. To remove an egg, select it while in map-edit mode and press 'ctrl-DEL'. To edit an egg, double click it in map editing mode. This will bring up the egg window where you will be able to change an existing egg's attributes.


6.4. Properties of eggs

Before you select the type of egg you want you can edit basic properties of eggs. These are:
* Criteria
 is very important as it sets what needs to be done to activate the egg. The options are:
Cached in - An egg with this characteristic is activated when the chunk it is on is loaded into memory. This usually happens from several screens away.
Party near - causes an egg to be activated whenever the player controlled character or any of his party members wander within the area specified by the distance option.
Avatar near - exactly the same as party near except only registers where the main character is moved, ignoring actions by the party members.
Avatar far - Its like Avatar near except with a twist. This property allows you to walk into the area specified by the distance property but then as you leave the area the egg will be activated as you distance yourself from it. Can be great for sneak attacks from behind.
Avatar footpad - In this case the distance property is ignored and the Avatar has to physically step onto the egg.
Party footpad - This option is identical to the Avatar footpad option except if either the main character or one of his companions stumbles onto the egg it will be activated.
Something on - This egg is activated whenever an object is placed AND removed within the area specified by an egg.
External - Eggs set to the external characteristic will be activated by button eggs in the vicinity.
* Probability
 of the egg being activated. By giving an egg a probability of 100 you can ensure that whenever the requirements necessary to make an egg activate are met, the egg will activate. With a probability of 0 nothing will ever happen when the egg's requirements are met. A probability anywhere between 0 and 100 will cause the activation of an egg to be a random event.
* Flags
 attributes you can give an egg to determine whether it will be activated or not. As a note you can mix and match flags, you can set an egg to nocturnal once only or nocturnal auto-reset. Note that an egg will be reactivated after you walk about a screenful away and then return if the the flags "once-only" or "auto-reset" are not set.
Nocturnal - Any egg with this setting will only be activated during the nighttime. Great for setting the spawning of creatures of the night, or giving some nice night time music.
Hatched - This creates an egg that has already been activated. It is inactive and will not do anything.
Once-Only - Any egg with this flag applied will only hatch once and then disappear from the game world.
Auto-reset - Eggs with this flag attached will continue to activate every time the conditions set in the egg menu are met.
* Distance
 allows you to set how far a character needs to be from an egg in order to activate it. Each distance unit is equal to one tile (8x8 pixel) of the map.



6.5. Placing a monster spawning egg

The first thing you want to consider before placing monster spawn is some of the basic egg attributes. What probability do you want? What distance? Will it be a nocturnal creature? Next you have to set the monster specific egg attributes. The first question is probably what type of monster you want to place. You can now switch to the main Exult Studio window, select shapes.vga and choose a shape. Drag and drop this on the "Exult Egg" window. Frame # isn't overly important when placing a monster, but for placing an object it can be very important. Enter these attributes into their respective form. You next have to set the monster's schedule. The various schedules that are important for a monster spawn are discussed next.
 You also have to set the spawned monster's alignment. Any creature set to a Neutral alignment will ignore the Avatar and friends, following their schedule until attacked. Any creature set to Evil will immediately attack the Avatar if you get too close. A Good creature will help the avatar in fights, but will also attack the Avatar if he is caught stealing or killing "good" NPCs. It will also attack evil Monsters or NPCs regardless of the Avatar. And finally Chaotic creatures or monsters will attack anyone, regardless of their alignment
 Next you can set the number of creatures you want to appear using the count option. You can set anywhere from 1 to 31 monsters.
 Finally you can assign a Usecode number or name to the spawned monster (leave this blank if you don't want to set one).
 When you're finished setting the egg the way you want, simply press "Apply" and place the egg on the world map.




6.6. Schedules of Monsters and Creatures

You can have the full set of schedules that NPCs can have but for a spawned monster you will most likely want to use one of the following schedules.

* Horiz. Pace
 Any creature given this schedule will pace back and forth in a horizontal manner. Great for guards and sentries
* Vert. Pace
 Same as the horizontal pace, except in a vertical direction.
* Hound
 Any creature given this schedule will slowly follow the main character wherever he goes. Good for creatures that won't take no for an answer.
* Stand
 Creatures given this setting will stand in one place until given a better reason to move.
* Loiter
 Creatures given this setting will wander aimlessly. They will move in random directions a bit at a time.
* Wander
 Any creature given this setting will slowly move around a fairly large area.
* Wait
 Creatures given this setting will complacently stay in one place.
* Shy
 Creatures given this setting are afraid of the main character and will slowly wander away from the Avatar.
* Waiter
 Give a creature this schedule and watch him run back and forth around a crowded area like he has a purpose.
* Graze
 An awful lot like loiter except the character seems to stay a little more to one area.
* Duel
 Doesn't do a whole lot by itself, but put two neutral creatures with these settings beside each other and its rumble time. This also works by placing them near training dummies or archery targets. For an extra laugh place 10 spawns each set for 31 guards to appear in dueling mode.
* Patrol
 An NPC with this schedule will follow "path" markers (shape #607). The default behavior is to go to "1", then "2", etc., and return to "1" when no higher numbers are found. There are also some fairly complicated rules that depend on the "quality" that you give to each of the path markers. (Exult Studio should have a dialog to create these, so I wouldn't worry about them right now.)




6.7. Jukebox, Sound Effects and Voice eggs

Using these eggs couldn't be more straightforward, select the sound effect, music score, or recorded digital voice you desire and then place them onto the map. When a character activates the egg they begin to play. You can set music and sound effects to play on a continuous loop for continuous effects such as water fountains or short pieces of background music that you don't want to quit until a new music egg is triggered.
 While Exult Studio is connected to Exult you can test the audio by pressing the play button.


6.8. Usecode eggs

Usecode eggs have many different functions that will be discussed later. The important thing to remember about the usecode egg menu is that function number is where you insert the hex value of the usecode function that this egg is going to execute.


6.9. Missile eggs

When you place a missile egg, the first thing you have to set is the egg's activation attributes. Do you want an egg to activate when the Avatar is near a certain spot, or should someone have to directly step on the trap?
 You can also set the direction you want the trap to fire when it is activated, you can choose any of the 8 cardinal directions.
 You can also use the delay timer to set how steady you want the stream of projectiles to be. 1 makes a constant stream of projectiles, while a value of 10 makes for the occasional danger. Don't set the timer to 0 seconds, Exult REALLY doesn't like this.
 Using these options you can make some pretty dangerous obstacles for the Avatar to avoid.



6.10. Teleport eggs

The primary purpose of the teleport egg is to simply move a character from one place to another instantly without forcing them to walk there. Think of any dungeon teleporter that moves you from one place to another.
 The teleport egg has two primary modes. The first mode possessed by the teleport egg is to choose the location that the party will be warped to by specifying a location on the over world map using x and y co-ordinates. If you place an egg on the map and a character meets the criteria specified by the egg they will be whisked away to the x and y coordinates set by the egg. This option can't be used to move your character onto roofs because there is no z option provided.
 To switch to the other mode of teleporting, press the use coordinates button. This directs the teleported towards a numbered path egg. By giving a path egg a unique number and then placing it on the map any teleporter set to this egg will transport the player there. The advantage of teleporting using a path egg is you can teleport your character onto the second floor of a building if the path egg is placed up there.


6.11. Weather eggs

There are two attributes of the weather egg that one needs to worry about.
* Weather
 The most important attribute as this sets the effect you can expect when an egg is activated.
Halt - Halts and current weather and set the world to a pleasant sunny default.
Snow - Snow flakes, clouds and music track #18 plays.
Rain - Rain, lots of thunder and lightning, clouds.
Sparkle - a different type of rain that seems to be more sparkly and eliminates the ability of the Avatar to use magic spells.
Fog the game experiences a white out and some rain drops.
Overcast Some clouds, never more than two casting their shadow.
Clouds - Much more clouds, some overlapping each other.
* Duration
 sets the how long the chosen weather will last. The time is measured in game time and can last up to 255 minutes.



6.12. Path eggs

The path egg is useful for placing an individual teleport location by hand. Give the path egg a unique number and then direct a teleport egg towards it. If the person steps on a teleporter set to the same number as the path egg, they will be teleported there.
 Note that it only works up to a distance of 256 tiles in each direction (in a square, not a circle). It also doesn't world-wrap, meaning a teleport egg at the far east edge won't find a path egg at the far west edge.


6.13. Button eggs

The button egg has the interesting ability to activate all eggs in the immediate vicinity that are set to external. You can set the area around the egg that will be affected by increasing the distance setting, keeping in mind that each distance setting is equal to 1 tile (8x8 pixel).


6.14. Intermap eggs

An intermap egg works precisely the same as a regular teleport egg except it can be used to teleport the main character between maps. The Coordinates options are used to set the precise tile the Avatar will be teleported to on the opposing map. The Map Number condition is used to set which map the main character will appear at.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. NPC editing
7.1. Editing an existing NPC

To edit an NPC with Exult Studio you need to be running a game in Exult and of course Exult Studio. Enable map editing and double click the NPC you want to edit. The Exult Studio NPC window will pop up with all the stats of the NPC.



7.2. Creating a new NPC

If you want to create a new NPC you have to select Create NPC in the edit menu. This will pop up the same NPC window as when you double click an NPC. Now enter all the properties of the new NPC as will be described in the following text. When you are satisfied with your new NPC hit Apply and you will be asked to choose a spot in Exult to place the NPC.


7.3. Basic NPC settings

* Face #
 Drag and drop a face from Faces.vga in the main Exult Studio window to the face field in the NPC window, or enter the face number or use the +/- buttons to select one.
* Name
 Choose a name for your NPC.
* Usecode
 Here you enter the usecode that is associated with the NPC.
* NPC #
 This cannot be changed.
* Ident
 This is a number used in usecode in SI to differentiate between different NPC possibilities. It can be used to decide which set of conversation options some party members have, as well as making some "monster" NPCs have a more persistent identity despite not having a set NPC number
* Shape #
 Either drag and drop a shape from shapes.vga into the line (or the black box to the right of it), enter a shape number or use the +/- buttons to select one.
* Frame #
 The frame of the above given shape the NPC starts with.
* Alignment
 Any NPC set to a neutral alignment will follow their schedule until attacked but will call guards when witnessing the Avatar stealing or killing NPCs with the alignment "neutral" or "good".
 A "good" NPC will help the avatar in fights, but will ignore theft, murder or being attacked. It will also attack evil Monsters or NPCs regardless of the Avatar.
 Any NPC set to "evil" will immediately be attacked by the Avatar when you go into combat mode. Some NPCs will not talk to you or will even attack you on sight when set to evil.
 "Chaotic" NPCs are a bit of a wild card, they will ignore theft or murder but will help other chaotic NPCs.
* Attack Mode
 You can choose the mode in which the NPC attacks when it goes into combat. Choose between Nearest, Weakest, Strongest, Berserk, Protect, Defend, Flank, Flee, Random and Manual. We don't advice using Manual as for most NPCs you will not be able to actually change the attack mode manually.



7.4. NPC Properties

The vital properties of an NPC are set in the Properties tab of the NPC Window.
* Strength
* Dexterity
* Intelligence
* Health
* Combat
* Mana
 How much mana you have left for casting spells. Only useful for members of the party and if the game allows party members casting spells.
* Max. Mana
 Maximum amount of mana you can have. Only useful for members of the party and if the game allows party members casting spells.
* Training
 How much Training points the NPC has left and can use at trainers. Only useful for party members.
* ExperienceOnly useful for party members.
* Food Level
 How hungry is the NPC. Only relevant for party members. Normal NPCs don't starve and don't need to be fed.



7.5. NPC Flags

Here you can set special properties of NPCs. Some are only set for special NPCs, party members or just the Avatar. A lot are also only available in SI. Here a brief listing of the flags and when needed a short description.
* Asleep
* Confused
* Dancing
* Fly
* In motion
* Invisible
* No Magic
* Petra
* Protection
 When you cast the protection spell on an NPC this flag gets set.
* Swim
 Allows an NPC to walk on water.
* Might

* Bleeding
 The NPC looses blood, and leaves a trail of blood when he moves.
* Conjured
* Don't render (BG) - Don't move (SI)
 Causes an NPC to become invisible or can't move
* Freeze
 The NPC is cold and needs warmer clothing.
* In party
 The NPC is a member of the party.
* Met
 The Avatar has previously spoken to the NPC.
* Don't move (BG) - Don't render (SI)
 Causes an NPC to become invisible or can't move
* Poisoned
* Female
* Tattooed
* Walk
 An NPC without this flag set cannot move
* Charmed
* Cursed
* Ethereal
 This makes it possible for the NPC to behave like a ghost (walk through walls, walk on water...)
* In action
* Read
 This NPC can read runic or ophidian (useful for the Avatar so signs can be read directly)
* Naked
* Paralyzed
* Polymorph
* Summoned
* Tournament
 In combat this NPC is unable to die.
* Zombie



7.6. NPC Schedules

In this Tab you can set the schedule the NPC follows normally.
* Activity
 With the button Set you can choose the schedule. Keep in mind that some schedules also require items, e.g. for the Blacksmith activity you need a smithy to work in. If there is no such item near the location you set, the NPC will use the next near item in the vicinity, for example the sleep activity will have the NPC wander to the next available bed.
 To clear the activity set it to --None--.
* Location
 Enter the x, y and z coordinates of the place you want the NPC to follow his schedule at. The z coordinate sets on which floor of a house the schedule begins. By placing the Avatar at the spot for the scheduled activity and pressing the Game button, Exult Studio will fill out the coordinates.
 Another way to set the coordinates is to click "Set in game" and then click on the desired spot in Exult.
 Also by pressing 'F2' at a place, the cheat screen will show you the coordinates in hex and decimal and you can use either system to enter the location.
* Locate
 This will center the map on the location set for the schedule.



7.7. NPC Presets

You can save presets that you can apply to any NPC. These save all the properties of an NPC, except name and usecode.
 To save a preset, set up an NPC the way you want it, enter a preset name and press the "New" button. To apply a preset to an NPC, select the preset from the dropdown list and press "Apply". Additionally you can export/import, clone, rename and delete presets.
 With this you can quickly create a set of guards, shopkeepers or other commonly used NPCs once you made a preset.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Basic editors
8.1. Creating Combination files

Create 'combination shapes', like a fence or an entire roof by selecting "Tools-New Combo" (see 4.5.). When you run Exult Studio the first time a file called combos.flx gets automatically created in the "Patch" folder. Choose the 'Pick for Combo' choice in the 'Modes' menu, and an empty window should pop up. In the game window, double-click a group of objects, and they should appear in the window - instead of doubleclicking an object you can also just keep pressing the right mouse button and swipe over all objects you want to add. You can then select an object there and tweak its position. When you are done hit apply and the combo gets temporally saved until you hit "Save all" or "Save - Save map".
 You can drag and drop combinations into the game window.


8.2. Custom Usecode

As hinted at (see 1.3.) Usecode is actually what runs Ultima VII and therefore any game created with Exult Studio.
 As of yet we do not have a Usecode editor/debugger. So writing your own Usecode is not that easy but OTOH not terribly hard.
For an example of how Usecode may look like download our SF Island mod for BG from our download page.
 In that zip you'll find a readme.txt which tells you how to run it.
 You will also see two files called usecode.uc and usecode.
Usecode.uc is the usecode script that will help you understand our usecode language.
 When you run ucc (see 12.5.) with that file (e.g. "ucc -o usecode usecode.uc") you will get the file called usecode. This file 'usecode' should be the same as the one in the zip file.
Marzo wrote an extensive tutorial at his website Seven Towers along with an up to date and extesnive list of intrinsics.
 Some outdated and only available on the wayback machine documentation:
 Wizardry Dragon and Marzo made a good list of intrinsics https://web.archive.org/web/20110711180447/http://www.thefeudallands.ca/srcdocs/files/intrinsics-uc.html and Pertex has written some documentation at http://web.archive.org/web/20071217233843/http://www.sophen.de/exult/ that might be able help you.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Basic map editing
9.1. Learning the basics of map editing

The first thing one will probably want to do once they have Exult Studio running is to begin creating their own little world. The first step towards this is learning how to move objects and chunks, and placing items from Exult Studio into the game world. And the best way to learn is by using an existing game like BG or SI.


9.2. Moving objects around

Perhaps the simplest way of making your world truly unique is to start out by moving existing structures around. Move is the default option in Exult Studio, but to ensure you are in move mode select it from the mode menu. You know you are in map-editing mode when a red grid is highlighted across the world. You can select any object (notice the red highlighting of selected objects) with the mouse and move it around. This works using a simple drag and drop approach. Simply grab a tree with a right click and place it on the other side of your viewing area. The only thing you can't drag and drop are chunks, which are the large ground sections mapped by the red grid system. If you want to place one object on top of another, just drag it on top and release. If the object can be supported in that position it will stay there. For a brief guide on placing an object that won't have support, but will be floating see further down. You can also change an object's x and y coordinates by selecting the object and pressing 'ctrl-arrow keys'. An object's z coordinate can be changed by selecting the object and pressing 'ctrl-page up' or 'ctrl-page down'.


9.3. How to place objects from Exult Studio

This could not be simpler in Exult Studio. Simply select a shape from the shapes.vga menu and drag it into Exult. In Windows I personally prefer to drag the item onto the taskbar, hovering over the Exult window, wait for the window to switch and then place the item. Once you found where you would like the object to appear, simply let go of the mouse and the object is placed. If you're unhappy where you placed the object, simply drag and drop it somewhere else.
 On dragging from Exult Studio you will get a green grid that will show you exactly where you can expect the object to show up.



9.4. Mark, delete, copy, make multiple objects

To mark multiple objects hold down 'ctrl' and click on the objects you want to mark. This is very useful when you want to handle a whole bunch of objects (like deleting, copying or multiplying objects).
If you placed an object onto the world map that you now feel should be removed, select the object with your mouse and press 'ctrl-x' or select the cut option from the Exult Studio Menu.
 This will remove the object from the world and place it into memory (if you don't want to keep the object in memory simply press 'ctrl-DEL' when it is selected). If you want to place the object somewhere else, press 'ctrl-v' or select the paste option, this will create a set of crosshairs that you can use to place your new object. To create multiple copies of an object, select an object so it has a red outline and press 'ctrl-c' or select the copy option. You can now paste another copy of the object on the world using paste.


9.5. Making floating objects like bridges

So you want to create an unsupported section of balcony, or you want to make it look like that Kilrathi ship you just placed is actually hovering above the ground. To do this set the object's z height by changing the value in the grid height menu. If you want your character to be able to walk underneath an object it must be set 4 grid heights above the surface which your character is walking on. If you want your character to be able to walk on an object, the top of the object must be no more then 1-grid height above the surface the character is currently on.



9.6. How to change the frame of an object

So you see an apple tree on the map, but you think you'd much rather have a palm tree. Exult Studio supports many different frames for each object. To change the frame of an object, select an object so it highlights red and select the "Basic Properties" option in the edit menu or just doubleclick the object while holding down 'ctrl'. The Exult Object box should appear. This gives you the option to select a different frame for the object to see what other frames this particular object has. The Exult Object option also allows you to manually set the height of an object that already exists on the map. Another way to select an objects frame, is to select the object from the shapes menu and then using the frames option in the lower right hand corner select just the frame you're looking for. Then you can then drag the object into your world normally.
You can also manipulate selected object's frame with 'ctrl-KP+' and 'ctrl-KP-'.
 And to rotate the object use 'ctrl-KP*'.
 Furthermore you can use these shortcuts for several selected objects at once.


9.7. How to change chunks (the big red outlined square)

To change the large pieces of map that are sandwiched between the red lines of the map-editing grid you have to place a chunk, instead of a shape. The various chunks available in Exult Studio are located under the heading U7chunks. The chunks are many large pieces of preformed landscape that help give the world a more consistent feel. They also make the job of editing the world somewhat easier. To place a chunk simply place it the same way that you would a shape, but keep in mind that chunks can only be placed within the red squared formed by the map-editing grid.

There are a lot of interesting chunks already available in the chunks.vga file, but what if you want to make some minor changes to the design of a pre-made chunk? Maybe make the Britannia transport system a little more safe by painting a yellow line down the centre of each road chunk.
 By selecting the Edit terrain option you can change a chunk by placing objects directly onto a chunk, doing this permanently changes the chunk you are editing so be careful. It may not look it, but if you then select the chunk you edited from the chunks.vga menu the chunk you place will have the changes you made.
 Also be careful because when you edit a chunk you change every chunk in the game that is the same as the chunk you're editing. To solve this problem go into the chunks menu and right click the chunk you want to edit and select new, then duplicate. You now have two identical chunks (with the new one being placed at the bottom of the list). You can then place your new chunk onto the world and edit it how you like without editing the other chunks.
 You can now place this duplicate chunk wherever you like and it will have the changes you made.


9.8. How to make a structures consisting of multiple objects

Many structures present in Exult consist of multiple objects. Examples of these are roofs, long sections of wall or fence. Constructing a roof can be a long and difficult process because it involves properly positioning multiple small objects and then manually setting each object's height. That's where the New Combos option located in the Tools menu comes in handy. Select the New Combos option and then enter the window where Exult is running. Your mouse will have become a cross hair. Double click on all the objects you plan on adding to your new object. In this example we're making a roof by double-clicking all sections of the roof.

As you double-click each object, the selection appears in the combo window showing you exactly what you have selected. Now give the object a name and select Okay. The object will now be temporarily saved in the combos.flx menu. The object can now be placed on the map normally. If you make a combo you want to keep, make sure to save before quitting Exult Studio. You can continue editing your combos even after you originally finish them, by double right clicking them from the combo menu.


9.9. More things you can do with Combos

One problem with the Exult Studio combo option is that when the combo is created many of the items are not in the rendering order you would want them to appear in game. To fix this problem, you can select individual items in the combo-builder window and by changing their viewing order you can make sure that all items appear exactly how you want them. You can also use the x,y,z coordinates to move individual items in your combo around to make sure that your combo looks exactly how you want. If you added an object to your combo that you don't wish to keep, simply select the item from the combo menu and press remove.


9.10. Use the paint feature to quickly create a forest

The best way to create multiple objects fast and conveniently is to use the paint option. If you want to make a forest of trees fast, select the tree from the shapes menu and then select the paint option from the mode menu. Select the Exult window and you can now quickly place multiple objects with the green grid.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Mods and patches
10.1. Introduction to Mods and Patches

With Exult Studio advancing more and more, there are now a small number mods and patches developed, both by Exult team members and other users. See FAQ.txt for a list.
Patches are meant for what the name implies, little patches to the original game. Changing shapes, fixing or changing some usecode and such. Patches also have the limitation that you can only have one patch per original game installed.
Mods on the other hand are more or less meant for heavy modifications of the original games. Changing the map layout, adding NPCs and objects, changing usecode and so on. You can have several mods installed which can be chosen from a convenient menu in Exult. Because of these advantages that mods have over patches, people now develop mods rather than patches.
There are several important tidbits you need to know for mods and patches and are outlined below.


10.2. Mod cfg files

Creating your own mod or patch is quite simple with Exult Studio. First you need to create a new folder in the "Mods" folder located in your Exult installation directory. You can name this folder whatever you like, but it is best to give it a name that reflects the mod or patch you are creating.
 Inside the mods folder you need to create a text file with the extension *.cfg, called the same name as your mod's folder. The folder name and the cfg name need to match their cases.
 For example if your mod folder is called "FooBar", the cfg file needs to be called "FooBar.cfg".
The cfg file needs to contain certain information about your mod or patch so that Exult can properly load it. Below is a sample cfg file with all possible settings and brief explanations of each entry.
 Almost all entries are optional, but you need at least display_string and required_version is strongly recommended.
<mod_info>
  <mod_title>
  short_title_of_mod

									The short title of your mod that has to match with the mod's folder name.

  </mod_title>
  <display_string>
  long title of mod

									The long title of your mod as it will appear in the mod selection menu in Exult.

  </display_string>
  <required_version>
  version number

									The minimum version of Exult required for this mod.

  </required_version>
  <codepage>
  ASCII

									The character encoding used for this mod (usually don't change this).

  </codepage>
  <patch>
  __MOD_PATH__/patch

									The subfolder in the mod folder where all patch files are located.


									Only use this if you want to change the folder name, default is "patch".

  </patch>
  <source>
  __MOD_PATH__/source

									The subfolder in the mod folder where all usecode source files are located.


									Useful for the helper tool "Compile Usecode". Default is the "patch" folder.

  </source>
  <gamedat_path>
  optional_path/gamedat

									The folder Exult will use for game data files.


									Only useful for developing your mod, otherwise it affects users of the mod.

  </gamedat_path>
  <savegame_path>
  optional_path

									The folder Exult will use for save game files.


									Only useful for developing your mod, otherwise it affects users of the mod.

  </savegame_path>
  <skip_splash>
  no

									Skips the intro and doesn't display the "View Introduction" menu entry.

  </skip_splash>
  <menu_endgame>
  yes

									Doesn't display the "View Endgame" menu entry.

  </menu_endgame>
  <menu_credits>
  yes

									Doesn't display the "View Credits" menu entry.

  </menu_credits>
  <menu_quotes>
  yes

									Doesn't display the "View Quotes" menu entry.

  </menu_quotes>
  <show_display_string>
  yes

									Doesn't display the display string in the bottom right of the menu.

  </show_display_string>
  <force_digital_music>
  yes

									Forces the use of digital music instead of MIDI.


									Useful if you change the digital music tracks in your mod.

  </force_digital_music>
</mod_info>


10.3. Patching the digital OGG tracks

If you want to customize your music tracks (in a mod or a patch) the only viable way is to use the OGG digital music tracks.
 You can replace existing tracks by placing your own OGG files in the patch folder of your mod or patch. The files need to follow the naming scheme NNN.ogg.
 Where NNN is the track number with leading zeros, e.g. 000.ogg for track 0, 010.ogg for track 10 and so on.
 You can also add new tracks by using track numbers that don't exist in the original game, e.g. 100.ogg and higher, currently up to 255.
Make sure to set the cfg option force_digital_music=yes to ensure that your mod or patch uses digital music, otherwise users might never hear your custom tracks.


10.4. Hardcoded global flags

Exult uses some hardcoded gloabl flags to ensure compatibility with the original games and some features of Exult itself.
 These flags should most likely be avoided if your mod is a full game mod, unless you want to use it's hardcoded functions.
* 0x3b = did_first_scene
 Set after arriving in Britannia and Iolo's short talk.
 With this unset the Avatar in BG might be invisible and some UI elements might be hidden.
* 0x03 = si_did_first_scene
 Set after arriving on Serpent Isle's shore and Iolo's short talk.
 With this unset some UI elements in SI might be hidden.
* 0x38 = failed_copy_protect
 Set after failing the copy protection check, does have some consequences in the game.
* 0x272 = doing_xenka_return
 When this flag is set in SI, it will be immediately be unset again.

The two did_first_scene flags can be utilized by mod creators to create an intro sequence before the actual game starts and be able to skip it by setting this global flag and querying it in their usecode.
 The UI elements are only hidden when the Avatar is set to don't move, can't act and can't act charmed.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Playscenes
11.1. Playscenes Introduction

Playscenes allow creating animated and/or text cutscenes using the media Exult knows how to handle. Namely FLIC animations, audio files OGG, WAV, VOC and also playback of a game's music and sfx tracks.
Exult will automatically look for intro, endgame, quotes and credits cutscenes in a game's or a mod's patch folder (files: intro_info.txt, intro.flx, endgame_info.txt, etc.) and play these instead of the original.
You can use these cutscenes in game with the UI_play_scene intrinsic (see SevenTowers for details).


11.2. Script Format

The script is loosely based on the format we use for de-hardcoded shape information. There are three possible sections:
* version: Only used if we significantly alter the format and need to discard older scripts.
* scene: For playing FLIC animations, audio and subtitles.
* text: For displaying text, either as scrolling (bottom to top) or as pages that are shown with a delay. Audio can be played back as well.

You can have several scene and text sections which will be played in the written order.


11.3. Scene Section

The scene section is for playing FLIC animations with audio and subtitles. Each line starts with a colon followed by the type and parameters separated by slashes.
FLIC animations:
:flic/index_number/frames_delay/fade_in/fade_out/end_delay
* index_number: The order of files in the corresponding flx file.
* frames_delay: Delay between FLIC frames in milliseconds. Use 0 to keep the delay read from the FLIC file, or any value to override it. Higher values make the animation slower.
* fade_in/fade_out: Uses the first or last frame to fade in/out for the entered time in milliseconds.
* end_delay: Adds a black screen at the end of the FLIC for the entered time in milliseconds.

Audio playback:
:sfx/sfx_number/start_time/stop_time/continue
:track/track_number/start_time/stop_time/continue
:ogg/index_number/start_time/stop_time/continue
:wave/index_number/start_time/stop_time/continue
:voc/index_number/start_time/stop_time/continue
* index_number/sfx_number/track_number: Order in the flx file or track/sfx number.
* start_time: Starts the audio at the time in milliseconds since the flic started playing.
* stop_time: Stops the audio at the time in milliseconds since the flic started playing.
* continue: Lets audio continue playing even though its scene section has finished playing.

Note: When speech is disabled, VOCs will not play.
Subtitles:
:subtitle/index_number/start_time/line_number/font/flic_color/position/duration
* index_number: Order of subtitle file in the flx.
* start_time: When to display subtitle in milliseconds since flic started.
* line_number: Subtitle texts use numbered lines (e.g., 001:\CTCentered text\nwith line break).
* font: Font to use for display.
* flic_color: Uses the entered number of the FLIC's palette.
* position: 0=bottom (default), 1=center, 2=top.
* duration: Time in milliseconds subtitle is shown (default is 2000ms).

Subtitles use the same text formatting as the text section (see below). Additionally you can use \n for line breaks.


11.4. Text Section

The text section is for displaying text either as scrolling or in pages with delays. Audio can be played alongside.
Text display:
:text/index_number/font/color/scroll_or_delay
* index_number: Order of text file in the flx.
* font: Switches between Credits font and Hot font (same shape, different colors).
* color: Color number (see below for available colors).
* scroll_or_delay: 0 for scrolling text, 1 for blocks with 3000ms delay, or any number higher than 1 for custom delay in milliseconds.

Credits font colors: 0=light orange, 1=bright orange, 2=green, 3=white, 4=bright pink, 5=white & grey screen, 6=bright green, 7=dark pink, 8=white & red screen, 9=white & dark purple screen, 10=pink, 11=pink & dark reddish screen, 12=menu blue, 13=green/yellow, 14=deep red, 15=yellow, 16=grey, 17=pink/brownred
Hot font colors: 0=light orange, 1=orange, 2=green, 3=white/grey, 4=bright orange, 5=orange & grey screen, 6=yellow, 7=dark orange, 8=yellow & red screen, 9=yellow & dark purple screen, 10=dark orange, 11=dark orange & dark reddish screen, 12=lighter blue, 13=dark grey/yellow, 14=deep blue, 15=washed out pink, 16=bright green, 17=pink/brownred
Note: The listed colors are for a BG game; in case of SI, the colors are different. You might need to test them.
Audio playback:
 Same as scene section: :sfx, :track, :ogg, :wave, :voc
Text formatting:
* Lines beginning with \C are centered.
* Lines beginning with \L are left aligned to the right of the center.
* Lines beginning with \R are right aligned to the left of the center.
* Lines without these begin at the left with 10px margin.
* Empty lines trigger a new page in delayed text or show as empty in scrolling text.



11.5. Notes and Limitations

* Audio volume is tied to the global volume set in the Volume Mixer. Track uses the music volume, sfx/wave/ogg use sound effects volume, and voc uses speech volume.
* OGG files can and should be played regardless of the digital music setting, so ogg playback is treated as sfx playback.
* Scrolling text only allows starting audio at the beginning as the textscroll function has no means to tell its state.
* Scrolling text speed cannot be set but can be sped up by holding down 'SHIFT'.
* 'ESC' stops the cutscene completely, while 'SPACE' skips to the next section.



11.6. Examples

Simple scene with one FLIC and background music:
:flic/0/0/1000/1000/2000
:track/1/0/0/1
This plays the first FLIC (index 0) with fade in and out of 1 second each and a 2 second black screen at the end. The music track 1 starts at the beginning of the FLIC and continues playing after the FLIC ends.
Scene with subtitles and sound effects:
:flic/2/0/0/0/0
:sfx/5/500/3000/0
:subtitle/0/1000/1/1/3/0/4000
This plays the third FLIC (index 2) with no fade or delays. The sound effect number 5 starts 500ms into the FLIC and stops at 3000ms. The first subtitle (index 0) is shown starting at 1000ms for 4 seconds in Hot font, flic color 3 at the bottom of the screen.
Text section with scrolling text and VOC speech:
:text/0/1/3/0
:voc/0/0/0/0
This displays the first text (index 0) in Hot font, color 3 as scrolling text. The first VOC (index 0) starts at the beginning of the text and plays until finished.


11.7. Creating Scene FLX Files

To create the FLX file you need expack from the Exult tools and for ease of use a build script.
Example for an intro cutscene:
1. In your patch folder or mod's data folder create intro_info.txt and the folder intro.
2. Place all the files you need for your cutscene into the intro folder.
 For example: animation1.flc, animation2.flc, music.ogg, sfx1.wav, voice1.voc, text1.txt, subtitles.txt
3. Create a text file called intro.in in the intro folder and add all the files and point at where the flx should be created.
4. Run expack -i intro.in

The .in file format lists the output flx file on the first line, followed by all input files in order. For example, to create intro.flx in the parent directory:
../intro.flx
animation1.flc
animation2.flc
music.ogg
sfx1.wav
voice1.voc
text1.txt
subtitles.txt



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Miscellaneous
12.1. Multi-map support

Exult now supports multiple maps. To create new maps select New from the Map menu. You now have an option to copy information over from an existing map. The Terrain option allows you to retain the lay of the land. If this option isn't selected your new map will be entirely ocean. Fixed and Moveable objects allow you to retain the remaining objects from the previous map (Jeff's favourite idea is to entirely copy the current Exult map and create a new 'Bizarro-Brittania'). You can quickly switch between maps in game using the command 'ctrl-alt-t'.


12.2. Creating a boat, flying carpet, or horse drawn carriage

By double clicking on a barge (horse drawn carriage/magic carpet) in map editing mode one can alter the properties of the barge through the barge editor. The Barge Editor allows one to alter the size of a currently existing barge. By increasing the size of the Magic Carpet you can use the added space to create some sort of a flying battleship. Theoretically the maximum size of a barge is 100x100, but an object that large will fill the entire screen and become extremely difficult to steer.
To create your own barge, you first need to chose Create Barge, select the dimensions of your barge and place them in the map. To create a magic carpet, place the small blue tiles from the magic carpet (shape# 840, frame 57) within the barge area and place the required number of seats on top of the magic carpet tiles. You now have your own custom carpet. Magic carpet tiles are only required for the seats your party will sit on, by expanding the area of the barge further you can create a custom area where you can place walls and other flooring tiles. Unfortunately there are limitations, all objects must be placed no more than four values in the vertical direction from the floor. For a craft to work you must have at least as many seats as party members.
To create a cart you need only place a floor tile from the carriage (shape 652, frame 7) within the barge area and place a seat on top of it but you must have a deed from one of the carriage vendors. If you place a draft horse on your cart then you will need a cart deed (shape 797, frame 0) that had the same quality set as the draft horse. The quality for an object can be set using the Exult Studio object tool.
You can also create a ship by placing the deck (shape 700, frame 2) a chair, and an unfurled sail within a barge created on the water. You also need a deed for the boat. To create a boat deed need a scroll that has the same quality value as the sail of your boat.


12.3. Importing and creating your own custom shapes

Importing a shape into Exult Studio is quite easy. Simply select the type of object you wish to create (shape, chunk, gump, etc.) and right-click on the display window and select New Shape or New Frame depending on which is pertinent. Once the new shape is created, right click on the new shape and select Import frame. Now select the desired shape from the folder. You must now save all in Exult Studio and both Exult Studio and Exult need to be restarted before the newly imported shape can be used in a game.
Note
 All shapes imported into Exult Studio must be in either .png or .shp format. .png is a standard format while .shp is an Exult specific file format. We recommend The Gimp (The GNU Image Manipulation Program) for editing graphic files for several reasons. It is free, it is relatively easy on hardware, and it has all the necessary functions for creating and importing shapes into Exult Studio.
Important
 For a shape to be compatible with Exult Studio it must be saved as a 255 colour interlaced .png/.shp file. RGB or grayscale images are not compatible. Transparent sections will remain transparent in Exult.


12.4. How to create a custom font?

For your convenience Exult Studio accepts .ttf (true type font) files, which is the standard file format for text in a Windows machine. Select new shape from fonts.vga, here you can either manually overwrite a single frame of a font or you can import an entire .ttf file by selecting the From font option. To overwrite an existing font set the shape of your newly imported font to that of a preexisting font. Unfortunately newly imported .ttf files don't have the correct offsets and you letters will look stuck together. To fix that you will have to manually edit all font frames to give them proper spacing.


12.5. Other tools that might be useful

In the process of creating Exult the team came up with some useful tools that might help in editing/making a game.
 These can be built from the Exult source or you can download the Windows binary snapshot. The source and binary snapshot can be found at https://exult.info/download.html.
 The tools are:
* mockup:
 This is a simple program that converts a 8 bpp indexed file into a u7map based on a colour and u7chunk association. See the manual.
* smooth:
 More advanced companion of mockup. See the manual.
* expack:
 lets you extract and create Flex files. See the manual.
* ipack:
 a tool for creating and updating Exult and Ultima VII image archives, such as 'shapes.vga'. See the manual.
* shp2pcx:
 converts all frames contained in a Shape file into PCX-format image files. See the manual.
* splitshp:
 can be used to combine frames of a Shape file into one file, or split a Shape file into its component frames. See the manual.
* textpack:
 can be used edit text flex files. See manual.
* ucc:
 can be used to create custom usecode (see 8.2.).
 See the manual.
* The GIMP Plug-in:
 can be used for editing shapes in the GIMP. Handles multiframe Shape files. See http://www.gimp.org for information on the GIMP.



12.6. About this 'terrain-editing' stuff and why you can't just drag objects to where you want.

This confused me too, and I originally planned on doing away with it. But do a little arithmetic: Ultima VII's world has 3072x3072 tiles; that's over 9 million that need to be set. My guess is that they came up with the idea behind 'u7chunks' to save artists time and to give the map a consistent look.
The basic idea is that each 'chunk' of flat terrain, 16x16 tiles, is stored in 'u7chunks', and is indexed by its position in this file (0, 1, 2, ...). The 'u7map' file specifies, for each 'chunk' in the Ultima VII map, which of the terrains is to be used. Since the entire map has 192x192 chunks, or a total of 36,864, and since 'u7chunks' has 3072 entries, each terrain is shared an average of over 10 times. When you go into map-editing mode in Exult, the numbers displayed are the indices from 'u7chunks'.
So here are the three sorts of scenery that you can see and edit:
1. The 'terrain' (flat landscape, rocks, shrubs, and first-story buildings) specified in 'u7chunks' and 'u7map'.
2. Other non-moveable objects (second-floor structures, trees) specified in the 'ifixnn' files.
3. Moveable and changeable objects specified in the 'iregnn' files.

The challenge of writing a map-editor is keeping the above straight, and reading/storing from/to the correct files. It's sorta-kinda working now :-)
For a more detailed explanation, see Gary Thompson's paper, u7edit.txt, in our 'docs' folder.


12.7. ifix and ireg reference chart

Crowley from our forum made this chart to easily reference the u7iregnn and u7ifixnn files in both BG and SI. Thanks a lot!






12.8. Porting Exult Studio to other platforms

Currently Exult Studio runs on U*ix and Windows platforms. First it only ran on U*ix but with some effort by Colourless, Kirben and Mark Siewart it was successfully ported to Windows.
A port to other platforms depends on when someone volunteers to do the work. There are three issues:
* GTK+3 has to be ported to the platform.
* Exult Studio uses sockets to communicate with Exult.
* For drag'n'drop we switched to SDL's DropFile.
 As an alternative to dragging objects, you can now select a shape, then insert it into the game window by left-clicking while holding the Shift key down.



12.9. About this client/server stuff?

A map-editor needs to provide the ability to display the game, place objects on the map, and move objects around. That functionality is already in Exult, and it makes sense to reuse it. So we could have made Exult a part of Exult Studio. However, Exult is already a huge program, and is getting unwieldy to work on.
With this architecture, Exult Studio can have all the messy code for displaying/editing dialog boxes, while Exult only needs a little bit of work to handle requests.
Also, I (Jeff) wanted to get a little experience programming with sockets:-)


12.10. What's next?

The next things to be implemented are:
* Exult Studio needs to be able to automatically create palettes 1-n from palette 0 using the code from ipack.
* It will also be very nice to have a Usecode debugger someday as well (Willem is actually working on it).
* A 'flags' editor for viewing and editing the global Usecode flags by name.




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Credits
13.1. Thanks

* Colourless, Kirben and Mark Siewart invested a lot of effort to port Exult Studio to Windows.
* Dragon Baroque who ported Exult Studio to GTK+3 (and currently working on porting to GTK4) and also made the cross platform drag and drop use SDL.




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Changes to the Documentation
14.1. - 21 January 2026

A lot of changes, corrections, updates in the whole document.


